# Volume- and Temperature-Dependent Thermodynamic Calculations

> **Note**: Requires version 0.19.6 or later.
> For SSCHA calculations, `symfc` and `phonopy` are required.
> For thermodynamic integration, `ASE` is required to perform molecular dynamics simulations.

SSCHA calculations for a given structure at a fixed volume can be performed using the `pypolymlp-sscha` command or the Python API.
These calculations provide either the free energy at a single temperature or the temperature-dependent free energy, both evaluated at the specified volume.
Similarly, a single thermodynamic integration run based on molecular dynamics computes the free energy relative to a given reference state at a specified volume and temperature.
By performing SSCHA calculations and thermodynamic integration over multiple volumes, it becomes possible to evaluate thermodynamic properties at equilibrium volumes or under specified pressures.

## Thermodynamic Property Calculation

In the following, we consider thermodynamic property calculations for a single target structure.

### 1. MLP Development

General-purpose polynomial MLPs or on-the-fly polynomial MLPs that enable successful SSCHA calculations and molecular dynamics simulations across target structures, volumes, and temperatures are required.

### 2. Generate Structures with Various Volumes

For a given structure, configurations at multiple volumes can be generated by isotropically modifying the initial structure using the `pypolymlp-structure` command.
In the following example, structures with 20 different volumes are generated from the `POSCAR` structure.

```shell
> pypolymlp-structure -p POSCAR --isotropic 20 --min_volume 0.8 --max_volume 1.2
> mkdir -p runs/{00001..00020}
> for i in {00001..00020};do cp poscars/poscar-00001 runs/$i/POSCAR;done
```

### 3. Run SSCHA Calculations at Various Volumes and Temperatures

SSCHA calculations are performed for all volumes.
For each volume, SSCHA calculations at multiple temperatures can be carried out using `pypolymlp-sscha` as follows.

```shell
> cd runs/00001
> pypolymlp-sscha --poscar POSCAR --pot polymlp.yaml --supercell 3 3 3 --temp_min 50 --temp_max 2000 --temp_step 50 --mixing 0.5 --tol 0.005
```
For more details, see [SSCHA calculations](calc_sscha.md).


### 4. (Optional) Calculate Electronic Free Energy from DFT

> **Note**: Only available for VASP.

Metallic systems often exhibit significant contributions from electronic thermal excitations, making it important to account for them when accurately evaluating thermodynamic properties.
To include this contribution in the free energy, one approach is to perform DFT calculations over all volumes.
The free energy at finite temperatures can then be approximately estimated using one-electron states obtained from standard DFT calculations.

When estimating free energies and other finite-temperature properties from `vasprun.xml` files generated by VASP, the following commands in `pypolymlp-utils` can be useful.

```shell
> pypolymlp-utils --electron_vasprun */vasprun.xml --temp_max 2000 --temp_step 50

# joblib required.
> pypolymlp-utils --electron_vasprun */vasprun.xml --temp_max 2000 --temp_step 50 --n_jobs -1
```
See also [Utilities](../utils.md).


### 5. (Optional) Thermodynamic Integration with MD Calculations at Various Volumes and Temperatures

To evaluate thermodynamic properties beyond SSCHA calculations, thermodynamic integration based on molecular dynamics (MD) simulations is useful.
Thermodynamic integration at a single volume and temperature can be performed using the `pypolymlp-md` command with the `--ti` option, as shown below.

```shell
> cd runs/00001
> pypolymlp-md --ti --poscar POSCAR --pot polymlp.yaml --supercell_size 3 3 3 --temp 300 --n_eq 5000 --n_steps 20000 --n_samples 15 --fc2 ./sscha/300/fc2.hdf5

# Calculate heat capacity from the variance of potential energy in MD simulation
> pypolymlp-md --ti --heat_capacity --poscar POSCAR --pot polymlp.lammps --supercell_size 3 3 3 --temp 300 --n_eq 5000 --n_steps 20000 --n_samples 15 --fc2 ./sscha/300/fc2.hdf5
```
In this example, thermodynamic integration is performed using 15 molecular dynamics runs at 300 K.
The numbers of equilibration steps and averaging steps are set to 5000 and 20000, respectively.
The converged state from SSCHA calculations at 300 K is used as the reference state.
A log file named `polymlp_ti.yaml` will be generated in the directory containing `fc2.hdf5`.

For more details, see [Thermodynamic integration](calc_ti.md).


### 6. Calculate Thermodynamic Properties

Once SSCHA calcutions (mandatory), electronic free energy calculations (optional), and thermodynamic integrations (optional) are performed at various volumes and temperatures, thermodynamic properties are calculated using the command `pypolymlp-thermodynamics`.
The `--sscha` options can specify result files from SSCHA calculations as follows.

```shell
> pypolymlp-thermodynamics --sscha ./runs/0*/sscha/*/sscha_results.yaml
```
A result file named `polymlp_thermodynamics.yaml` will be generated.

If including contributions from electronic free energy and thermodynamic integration beyond SSCHA, use the `--electron` and `--ti` options to specify the locations of their respective result files.

```shell
> pypolymlp-thermodynamics --sscha ./runs/*/sscha/*/sscha_results.yaml --electron electrons/*/electron.yaml --ti runs/*/sscha/*/polymlp_ti.yaml
```
At each volume and temperature, the force constant file `fc2.hdf5`, used as the reference state for thermodynamic integration, is assumed to be located in the same directory as the `polymlp_ti.yaml` file.
For MD-based thermodynamic integration in version 0.19.6 or later, the force constant files are expected to be copied into the corresponding directories.
If the locations of the reference force constants are explicitly specified, use the `--ref_fc2` option as follows.

```shell
--ref_fc2 runs/000*/sscha/0/fc2.hdf5
```

The electronic free energy contribution can sometimes depend on the atomic configuration.
In `pypolymlp`, the difference between the electronic free energy for the equilibrium structure at 0 K and the average electronic free energy over sampled structures obtained from the density matrix in SSCHA can be included.
The temperature-dependent free energy differences and entropy differences must be provided in the `electron.yaml` files for each volume, using the same format as for the electronic free energy.
The `--electron_phonon` option is used to specify the location of these files.
```shell
--electron_phonon electrons_sscha/*/electron.yaml
```

## Phase Boundary Estimation

### Command-Line Interface

If thermodynamic properties are computed for two phases, the phase boundary under pressure–temperature conditions can be determined using the `--boundary` option.
Files containing thermodynamic properties for the two phases are required as inputs to the `--boundary` option.

```shell
pypolymlp-thermodynamics --boundary polymlp_thermodynamics_total1.yaml polymlp_thermodynamics_total2.yaml
```

### Python API
```python
from pypolymlp.api.pypolymlp_thermodynamics import PypolymlpTransition

"""
Parameters
----------
pressure_interval: Pressure interval (GPa).
fit_gibbs_max_order: Maximum order of pressure-G polynomial fitting.
"""

transition = PypolymlpTransition(
    "polymlp_thermodynamics_total1.yaml", "polymlp_thermodynamics_total2.yaml"
)
tc = transition.find_phase_transition()
pd = transition.compute_phase_boundary(pressure_interval=0.25, fit_gibbs_max_order=4)
```
