# Automated Division of DFT Datasets

> **Note**: Version 0.19.1 or later.

When a dataset contains structures with extremely high energies or strong forces that fall outside the range relevant to most calculations and simulations, the root mean square errors (RMSEs) evaluated over the entire dataset can be significantly influenced by these structures, which is undesirable.
Moreover, in `pypolymlp`, weights are automatically assigned to dataset entries according to their energies and forces, with smaller weights given to such high-energy or high-force structures.
Therefore, in these cases, the overall RMSE computed across all structures may not serve as a reliable indicator of predictive performance for property calculations and simulations.

A remedy for this issue is to divide the dataset into important subsets and those for which high accuracy is not required in most calculations and simulations, and to evaluate the errors separately for each subset.
`pypolymlp` supports automatic division of datasets into subsets based on energy and atomic force values.


## Command-line Interface

To divide datasets generated by VASP, the `--auto_dataset` option in `pypolymlp-utils` can be used as follows:

```shell
> pypolymlp-utils --auto_dataset dataset1/*/vasprun.xml dataset2/*/vasprun.xml --elements Si --n_divide 6
```
The resulting dataset files for each subset are saved in the `polymlp_datasets` directory.

## Python API
```python
import glob
from pypolymlp.api.pypolymlp_utils import PypolymlpUtils

vaspruns = glob.glob("DFT/*/vasprun.xml")
elements = ["Si"]

utils = PypolymlpUtils(verbose=True)
utils.divide_dataset(vaspruns, elements, n_divide=5)
```

## How to Use Subsets in MLP Development

After dividing a dataset into subsets using `pypolymlp`, each subset can be used independently for training or testing in machine learning potential (MLP) development.
A file named `polymlp.in.append`, generated during the dataset division, can be appended to `polymlp.in`, which serves as the input file for MLP development.

```shell
> cat polymlp.in.append >> polymlp.in
```

Data subsets are identified using tags such as "train" or "test" followed by numbers, for example, "train1" and "test1".
Subsets with smaller numbers contain structures with high energies and large force values.
In contrast, subsets with larger numbers consist of structures with lower energies and smaller force values, which are generally more relevant for most subsequent calculations.
