# Generator of Structures for DFT Calculations

The `pypolymlp-structure` command can generate random structures from a given set of input structures.
Once DFT calculations are performed on these structures, the resulting data can be used as training and test datasets for developing MLPs.


To develop on-the-fly MLPs for a target compound, it is sufficient to generate random structures from its equilibrium structure.
In contrast, to develop general-purpose MLPs for a target system, random structures should be generated from a diverse set of configurations, including defective structures as initial configurations, depending on the intended purpose.


The procedure for generating random structures and the magnitude of the random variations depend on the intended purpose and the target simulation.
`pypolymlp` supports the following procedures:

- Random atomic displacements with constant magnitude
- Random atomic displacements with sequential magnitudes and random volume changes
- Random atomic displacements, random volume changes, and random shear deformations

## Random Atomic Displacements from a Single Structure

**Constant-Magnitude Atomic Displacements without Cell Changes**

In the following example, ten random structures are generated by introducing atomic displacements with a constant magnitude into the supercell defined by the structure specified in `POSCAR`.

```shell
# const_distance: Magnitude of displacements in angstrom.
> pypolymlp-structure -p POSCAR --displacements 10 --const_distance 0.01 --supercell 3 3 2
```

**Sequential-Magnitude Atomic Displacements without Cell Changes**

In the following example, ten random structures are generated by introducing atomic displacements with sequentially varying magnitudes into the supercell defined by the structure specified in `POSCAR`.
The maximum magnitude (in angstroms) controls the distribution of random atomic displacements.

```shell
> pypolymlp-structure -p POSCAR --displacements 10 --max_distance 1.5 --supercell 3 3 2
```

**Sequential-Magnitude Atomic Displacements with Volume Changes**

In the following example, ten random structures are generated by introducing atomic displacements with sequentially varying magnitudes into the supercell defined by the structure specified in `POSCAR`.

In addition, volume changes can be introduced using `--n_volumes`.
The total number of generated structures will be `n_volumes * n_displacements`.

```shell
> pypolymlp-structure --poscars POSCAR --displacements 10 --max_distance 1.5 --supercell 3 3 2 --n_volumes 5 --min_volume 0.8 --max_volume 1.2
```

## Random Structures From a Single Structure

Random structures with atomic displacements, volume changes, and shear deformations can be generated from a single structure using the `--standard` option.
In this procedure, the supercell size and shape are automatically determined using the `--max_natom` option.
In the following example, 100 random structures of a supercell containing up to 100 atoms are generated.

```shell
> pypolymlp-structure --poscars POSCAR --standard 100 --max_distance 1.5 --max_natom 100
```

Structures with low and high densities can be generated using the `--low_density` and `--high_density` options.
The magnitude of atomic displacements in these structures is controlled by the `--distance_density_mode` option (in angstroms).

```shell
> pypolymlp-structure --poscars POSCAR --standard 100 --max_distance 1.5 --low_density 10 --distance_density_mode 0.1 --high_density 10
```

## Random Structures From Multiple Structures

Random structures with atomic displacements, volume changes, and shear deformations can also be generated from multiple structures using the `--standard` option by specifying them with the `--poscars` option.
This procedure, applied to a diverse set of structures covering a wide range of configurational space, is useful for generating datasets for developing general-purpose MLPs.

```shell
> pypolymlp-structure --poscars prototypes/icsd-* --standard 30 --max_distance 1.5 --low_density 5 --distance_density_mode 0.1
```
The generated structures will be listed in `polymlp_str_samples.yaml`, and corresponding POSCAR files will be saved in the `poscars` directory.

<!--
```
> pypolymlp-structure --prototype --n_types 1
> pypolymlp-structure --prototype --n_types 2 --comp 0.25 0.75
> pypolymlp-structure --prototype --n_types 2 --comp 1 3
> pypolymlp-structure --prototype --n_types 3
```
Only alloy structure types are available.
Selected prototypes are listed in polymlp_prototypes.yaml.
-->
